This appears to be two overlapping bugs plus a likely data-consistency problem. It is not primarily a React refresh issue.

1. The card is incorrectly replacing the QBO payer with a Stripe payer

The reconciliation-card API looks for a Stripe payout linked to the QBO deposit and, for a single-charge payout, returns that charge’s payerName. The query uses an unordered LIMIT 1.

The frontend then does this:

const qbPayerName = card.stripeChargeDonorName ?? card.payerName;

So when Stripe data exists, the card displays the Stripe charge donor instead of the actual QuickBooks payer.

That directly explains why QBO deposit 31718 displays Jamie Rue. Jamie is probably the payer on a Stripe charge associated—correctly or incorrectly—with one of the deposit’s linked payouts. The UI is presenting that as though it were the QBO payer.

This part is certain from the code.

2. Deposit 31718 may have more than one payout link

The database guarantees that each Stripe payout has only one settlement-link row, but it does not guarantee that each QBO deposit is used by only one payout:

payout_id has a unique index.
deposit_staged_payment_id only has an ordinary index.

Therefore this is currently legal:

Stripe payout	QBO deposit
Jamie Rue payout	31718
Dionne Kirby payout	31718

Newer manual code tries to prevent this at the application layer, but older records, automated proposals, or prior code paths could already have produced duplicates.

The lower-level settlement writer only upserts by payout ID. It does not check whether another payout already points to that deposit.

Worse, several read paths simply choose the first matching payout:

Card enrichment uses LIMIT 1 without ordering.
Bundle canonicalization takes the first result without checking whether several exist.

So the likely sequence is:

31718 already had a stale or incorrect Jamie Rue payout link.
Resolving Dionne Kirby created or confirmed another payout link.
The UI reported success because that write succeeded.
The old Jamie relationship remained.
The card query continued selecting Jamie’s payout or charge.
31718 remained in the work queue because at least one linked payout still had unresolved charges.

The queue intentionally keeps a QBO deposit visible when any payout tied to it still has unresolved charge-level work.

This is the strongest explanation for the “successful connection that does not appear to stick.”

3. The Jamie Rue 409 is probably a ledger-versus-pointer mismatch

The right-hand column decides that a gift is “unlinked to money” primarily by looking for counted rows in payment_applications.

But the QBO linking endpoint also checks:

whether the QBO row is still derived as pending;
whether it belongs to a group;
whether another payment has already claimed the gift through the ledger;
whether a legacy physical matchedGiftId, createdGiftId, or related relationship already prevents the update.

It returns 409 when those facts disagree with the right-column proposal.

The most plausible Jamie state is:

the gift has an old header-level or staged-row relationship;
the corresponding payment_applications row is missing or points elsewhere;
therefore the right column believes the gift lacks money;
but the reconcile mutation sees the existing claim and refuses to create a second one.

A second possibility is that the Jamie QBO payment has already been claimed as charge-level Stripe↔QBO settlement evidence. That relationship is stored separately in linked_qb_staged_payment_id, and the right-column QBO proposer does not appear to exclude every such claimed row.

The exact 409 response body would distinguish these cases:

not_pending
source_group_member
link_conflict
gift_already_stripe_sourced
another claimed-row conflict