does this allow for a simpler, more elegant schema and setup than we currently have? i feel like we created so much complexity to deal with these ideosyncracies.

Yes. The new authority model allows a substantially simpler system because much of the current complexity exists to answer an impossible question:

“Which QBO row is the real donor payment?”

For processor transactions, the answer is: none of them necessarily is. The Stripe charge is the donor payment; the Stripe payout is the settlement batch; the bank transaction is the actual deposit; and QBO is the downstream accounting representation.

Once those roles are separated, many of the special cases disappear.

The simpler model

There are five distinct grains:

BANK MOVEMENT
$194.87 actually entered the bank
        ↓
SETTLEMENT BATCH
Stripe payout po_... was $194.87
        ↓
RECEIPT UNITS
Randy Steiner charge: $100.00 gross
Mark/Jill Blank charge: $103.83 gross
        ↓
FUNDRAISING RECORDS
Two CRM gifts with their allocations
        ↓
ACCOUNTING POSTING
QBO records how the batch, revenue, and fees were booked

Each layer has one job.

Layer	Answers
Bank transaction	Did money actually enter or leave the bank?
Settlement batch	Which processor payout or check batch created it?
Receipt unit	What individual donor payment occurred?
Gift and allocations	Who receives donor credit, and how is it treated?
QBO posting	How was it recorded in accounting?

The system no longer needs to force one record to answer all five questions.

Why the current system became complicated

The current staged_payments model treats QBO records as incoming-money units that can be matched to donors and gifts. It therefore carries QBO facts, donor candidates, match scores, gift-resolution state, classification state, and reconciliation state in the same area.

The current payment_applications table then has to support three evidence-source types, counted versus corroborating roles, proposal versus confirmation state, mint ownership, source-specific anchor constraints, and duplicate suppression.

The settlement system also ties the Stripe payout directly to a staged QBO deposit record, even though the real-world settlement counterpart is the bank transaction.

That produced complexity such as:

QBO-to-gift and Stripe-to-gift applications representing the same money
Counted versus corroborating evidence
Settlement supersession
Fee-band logic
Coarse deposit gifts that must later be archived
Conflict gifts
Gift-creation ownership flags
Multiple pointer-retirement efforts
Special grouping rules
Status derivations from several generations of relationships
Donor matching based on QBO names that may simply be wrong

Most of those are compensating mechanisms for the earlier authority model.

A cleaner target schema
1. Raw evidence tables

Keep source data separate and largely immutable:

bank_transactions
stripe_payouts
stripe_charges
donorbox_donations
quickbooks_transactions

These tables preserve what each system actually said. They do not contain canonical cross-system conclusions.

2. Canonical receipt units

Add one normalized donor-payment entity:

receipt_units {
  id

  sourceKind:
    | "stripe_charge"
    | "check"
    | "direct_ach"
    | "wire"
    | "qbo_payment_provisional"

  stripeChargeId
  checkItemId
  provisionalQbTransactionId

  grossAmount
  feeAmount
  netAmount
  receivedDate

  lifecycle:
    | "received"
    | "partially_refunded"
    | "refunded"
    | "disputed"
}

A receipt unit means:

One donor-level payment occurred.

For Stripe, it is deterministically created from a charge. Donorbox supplies additional donor and designation evidence but does not become another competing money unit.

For an occasional check, the receipt unit can initially be based on a reviewed QBO payment. That provenance remains explicitly provisional until a check register or stronger source is available.

3. Settlement relationships

Use source-specific settlement tables rather than a universal relationship table:

stripe_payout_bank_matches {
  stripePayoutId
  bankTransactionId
  lifecycle
  confirmedByUserId
  confirmedAt
}

Later:

check_batch_bank_matches {
  checkDepositBatchId
  bankTransactionId
  lifecycle
}

Stripe already knows which charges belong to which payout, so no manually maintained charge-to-payout relationship is needed beyond the imported Stripe payout ID.

4. Receipt-to-gift applications

Replace the source-polymorphic payment ledger with:

receipt_gift_applications {
  id
  receiptUnitId
  giftId
  amountApplied
  matchMethod
  confirmedByUserId
  confirmedAt
}

This relationship always means one thing:

This portion of this real donor payment belongs to this CRM gift.

There is no evidence_source branch. There is no QBO-versus-Stripe source competition. There is normally no counted versus corroborating distinction.

A receipt unit is money. A QBO posting is not.

M:N remains available for legitimate cases:

One payment split across two gifts
Two partial payments satisfying one gift
A combined payment covering more than one commitment
5. QBO posting relationships

Keep accounting downstream:

qb_posting_links {
  id
  qbTransactionId

  bankTransactionId
  receiptUnitId
  giftId

  role:
    | "bank_posting"
    | "gross_revenue"
    | "processor_fee"
    | "donor_detail"
    | "other"

  reviewStatus:
    | "unreviewed"
    | "consistent"
    | "mismatch"
    | "accepted_historical"
    | "correction_requested"
    | "corrected"
}

A particular link may concern:

The bank deposit
The gross revenue
The fee
The donor-level accounting record

The QBO transaction does not contribute money to the gift. It documents how the already-established money was recorded.

A separate discrepancy table is useful only when detailed structured differences are needed. It does not need to be part of the core money model.

What could disappear or shrink
staged_payments

It can become a much narrower imported-QBO table or be renamed quickbooks_transactions.

Remove its responsibility for Stripe-originated:

Donor identity
Gift creation
Gift ownership
Counted money application
Settlement truth
Processor composition

It can retain:

Raw QBO facts
Classification of the accounting transaction
Links to bank transactions, receipt units, or gifts
Coding review and discrepancy status
Interim direct-check workflows
payment_applications

Replace it with receipt_gift_applications.

Fields that likely disappear from the core relationship:

evidence_source
stripe_charge_id
donorbox_donation_id
link_role
lifecycle beyond proposal/confirmation, if proposals are stored separately
created_the_gift
Corroborating uniqueness rules
Source-specific partial unique indexes

Gift creation provenance can live on the gift or in an audit event:

Gift created from receipt unit X

It does not need to affect the money relationship forever.

settlement_links

The concept remains, but it becomes simpler:

Stripe payout ↔ bank transaction

It no longer needs to point to the QBO record or carry gift-conflict semantics.

Supersession

The current rule that charge-level applications must supersede a coarse QBO deposit application becomes unnecessary because QBO processor rows never count as donor money in the first place.

Unit groups

Some grouping remains useful for genuinely combined direct receipts, but many processor-related grouping cases disappear because Stripe already supplies authoritative payout membership.

Derived statuses

Instead of one elaborate reconciliation status, derive four small states:

Bank settlement:
unmatched | confirmed

Receipt application:
unassigned | partial | complete | conflict

CRM information:
incomplete | complete

QBO posting:
not posted | unreviewed | consistent | mismatch accepted

No single state machine needs to understand the entire system.

What does not disappear

The new model is simpler, but not simplistic. You still need:

Raw evidence preservation
M:N receipt-to-gift applications
Refund and dispute handling
Gross-versus-net calculations
Gift and pledge allocation inheritance
Historical QBO discrepancy records
Check-batch composition once available
Finance permissions and audit history
Idempotent source imports

Those are real business complexities. The difference is that each has an obvious place.

Stripe workflow under the simpler model
1. Import Stripe charge
   → create receipt unit automatically

2. Match Donorbox metadata
   → resolve donor, designation, campaign

3. Create or link CRM gift
   → receipt_gift_application

4. Import Stripe payout
   → charge membership already known from Stripe

5. Import bank transaction
   → stripe_payout_bank_match

6. Derive QBO coding instructions
   → gross revenue, fees, net deposit, allocations

7. Import QBO accounting records
   → qb_posting_links and consistency review

There is no need to first create a QBO gift, later discover Stripe charges, and then decide which representation should count.

Direct check workflow

Until check deposit registers exist:

QBO payment
→ reviewed provisional receipt unit
→ CRM gift

Actual bank transaction
→ confirmed bank settlement

QBO posting
→ initially serves both as provisional donor evidence
  and as the accounting record

This is explicitly a fallback workflow, not the governing architecture.

Later:

Check deposit register item
→ authoritative receipt unit

QBO payment
→ accounting posting only
Migration approach

Do not try to redesign and rewrite everything simultaneously.

Phase 1: establish the authority rules
Import actual bank transactions.
Match Stripe payouts to bank transactions.
Declare Stripe charges—not QBO records—the counted receipt source for Stripe.
Stop creating gifts from QBO records identified as processor settlement or processor accounting entries.
Phase 2: introduce receipt units
Backfill one receipt unit per Stripe charge.
Move Stripe charge-to-gift relationships to receipt-to-gift applications.
Create provisional receipt units for legitimate direct QBO payments only.
Phase 3: remove duplicate authority
Demote or retire QBO counted applications for processor money.
Remove settlement supersession logic after parity is verified.
Move QBO mismatch handling into accounting review.
Narrow the reconciliation workbench around the four independent states.
Phase 4: simplify storage
Retire obsolete source pointers and status fields.
Reduce staged_payments to imported QBO facts and accounting review.
Rename tables where that clarifies their actual responsibility.
Update SCHEMA.md, reconciliation rules, and memory only after implementation matches.
The key simplification

The current model asks:

Which imported record should count as the gift?

The cleaner model says:

A donor-level receipt is the money. Source records prove where it came from, bank records prove settlement, CRM records describe donor credit, and QBO records describe accounting.

That should result in fewer tables with overlapping meanings, fewer status machines, fewer corrective actions, and substantially less reconciliation-specific code.

can you write this up more concisely - the last two answers - for me to give to the coding agent?
Reconciliation Architecture Revision
Problem

The current reconciliation model became overly complex because it treats QuickBooks records as though they are authoritative donor-payment records.

They are not always reliable. QuickBooks can mislabel donors, represent processor payments at the wrong grain, and record net Stripe amounts rather than gross gifts.

For processor-originated money:

The bank transaction proves money reached the bank.
The Stripe payout identifies the settlement batch.
The Stripe charges identify the individual donor payments and gross amounts.
Donorbox/Stripe metadata helps identify donors and designations.
The CRM gift and allocations establish canonical donor credit and fundraising treatment.
QuickBooks records the downstream accounting treatment, which may be correct, incorrect, or historically accepted.
Target authority chain
Actual bank transaction
→ Stripe payout
→ Stripe charges
→ Donorbox / processor metadata
→ CRM gifts and allocations
→ QuickBooks accounting records

QuickBooks should not determine the donor for Stripe-originated money.

Core schema model
Raw source records

Keep source data immutable and separate:

bank_transactions
stripe_payouts
stripe_charges
donorbox_donations
quickbooks_transactions

Raw source tables should preserve what each system reported. They should not contain canonical cross-system conclusions.

Canonical receipt units

Add a normalized donor-payment entity:

receipt_units {
  id
  source_kind
  stripe_charge_id
  provisional_qb_transaction_id
  gross_amount
  fee_amount
  net_amount
  received_date
  lifecycle
}

A receipt unit means:

One donor-level payment occurred.

For Stripe, create one receipt unit automatically for each charge.

For checks and direct payments, a reviewed QBO payment may temporarily create a provisional receipt unit until stronger evidence is available.

Receipt-to-gift applications

Replace the source-polymorphic payment ledger with:

receipt_gift_applications {
  id
  receipt_unit_id
  gift_id
  amount_applied
  match_method
  confirmed_by_user_id
  confirmed_at
}

This relationship has one meaning:

This portion of this donor payment belongs to this CRM gift.

It may remain many-to-many for legitimate splits and combined payments.

Settlement relationships

The primary Stripe settlement relationship should be:

Stripe payout ↔ actual bank transaction

For example:

stripe_payout_bank_matches {
  stripe_payout_id
  bank_transaction_id
  lifecycle
  confirmed_by_user_id
  confirmed_at
}

Stripe already provides payout membership, so charges do not need to be manually assigned to payouts.

QuickBooks posting relationships

QuickBooks should be downstream accounting evidence:

qb_posting_links {
  id
  qb_transaction_id
  bank_transaction_id
  receipt_unit_id
  gift_id

  role
  review_status
}

Possible roles include:

Bank posting
Gross revenue
Processor fee
Donor detail

Possible review states include:

Unreviewed
Consistent
Mismatch
Accepted historical
Correction requested
Corrected

QuickBooks relationships do not count money toward a gift.

Going-forward Stripe workflow
1. Import the posted bank transaction.
2. Match it to the Stripe payout using amount, date, account, and trace data.
3. Use Stripe to identify the charges included in the payout.
4. Create one receipt unit per Stripe charge at the gross amount.
5. Resolve the donor and designation using Donorbox/Stripe and CRM data.
6. Create or link the CRM gift.
7. Create editable gift allocations from the pledge, designation, or review.
8. Produce the accounting instructions for QuickBooks.
9. After finance records the transaction in QBO, import and verify the posting.

The application should determine the correct accounting treatment before QBO is filled out.

Checks and direct payments

Until check deposit registers are available:

QBO payment
→ reviewed provisional receipt unit
→ CRM gift

Actual bank transaction
→ confirms settlement

This is an interim exception because check volume is low.

Later, the preferred chain is:

Bank deposit
→ check deposit register
→ individual checks
→ receipt units
→ CRM gifts
→ QBO accounting
What should become simpler
staged_payments

Narrow it into imported QuickBooks facts and accounting review.

Remove responsibility for Stripe-originated:

Donor identity
Gift creation
Counted gift applications
Settlement truth
Processor composition
payment_applications

Replace with receipt_gift_applications.

The new relationship should not need:

evidence_source
Source-specific anchor columns
Counted versus corroborating roles
Settlement supersession
Gift-creation ownership semantics
Source-specific uniqueness rules
settlement_links

Simplify to payout-to-bank settlement.

Do not attach donor or gift-conflict semantics to settlement records.

Status

Use several small derived states rather than one combined reconciliation state:

Bank settlement:
unmatched | proposed | confirmed

Receipt-to-gift application:
unassigned | partial | complete | conflict

CRM information:
incomplete | complete

QBO posting:
not posted | unreviewed | consistent | mismatch accepted

A historical QBO error should not prevent financial reconciliation once the bank, processor, receipt, and CRM relationships are correct.

Migration sequence
Phase 1: authority correction
Add/import actual bank transactions.
Match Stripe payouts to bank transactions.
Declare Stripe charges as the counted receipt source for Stripe money.
Stop creating gifts from QBO processor records.
Phase 2: receipt units
Add receipt_units.
Backfill one receipt unit per Stripe charge.
Add receipt_gift_applications.
Migrate Stripe-to-gift links.
Create provisional receipt units only for legitimate direct QBO payments.
Phase 3: remove duplicate authority
Retire counted QBO applications for processor money.
Remove settlement supersession once migration parity is verified.
Move QBO mismatches into accounting review.
Simplify the workbench around the independent states above.
Phase 4: cleanup
Narrow or rename staged_payments.
Retire obsolete pointers and statuses.
Update Drizzle, OpenAPI, tests, SCHEMA.md, reconciliation documents, and agent memory together.
Non-negotiable rules
Raw imported evidence is immutable.
Stripe charges determine gross Stripe gifts.
Bank transactions prove settlement.
QBO processor labels never determine donor identity.
QBO accounting records never count as additional gift money.
CRM gifts and allocations remain canonical for donor credit and fundraising treatment.
Do not remove the current model until backfill, parity checks, and database-backed tests confirm the replacement.