Revised model
Award / pledge
├── legal commitment or award ceiling
├── annual fundraising and collection plan
├── optional fixed installment schedule
└── actual payments created from QB evidence

Do not add:

Eligible-expense tracking
Drawdown availability
Claim preparation or approval workflow
Submitted/approved reimbursement balances
Reimbursement-period accounting

Finance can continue managing those details outside this CRM.

1. Keep the disbursement distinction

Add a pledge-level field:

disbursementModel:
  | "fixed_commitment"
  | "cost_reimbursement";

This controls how future cash is represented and how actual payments are created.

reimbursable should eventually stop being treated as a kind of grant condition. It is a payment mechanism, while conditions are a separate concept. The existing code already treats reimbursable as nonconditional for probability weighting, which reinforces that separation.

2. Use pledge allocations as the annual reimbursement forecast

The existing pledge allocations already contain most of what is needed:

Fiscal year
Planned amount
Entity
Purpose and restrictions
Direct/indirect reimbursement classification

For a cost-reimbursement award, define the fields this way:

awarded_amount
    = legal maximum or award ceiling

sum(pledge allocation sub_amount)
    = amount Wildflower currently expects to collect

allocation fiscal year
    = year in which Wildflower expects that amount to contribute
      to fundraising planning and projections

reimbursement_type
    = direct or indirect share

This allows an award to look like:

Fiscal year	Share	Expected collections	Counts toward fundraising goal
FY27	Direct	$600,000	$0
FY27	Indirect	$150,000	$150,000
FY28	Direct	$900,000	$0
FY28	Indirect	$225,000	$225,000

The current rule already excludes direct reimbursement allocations from goal analytics while counting indirect and untagged allocations.

For a cost_reimbursement pledge, I would require every allocation to have reimbursement_type populated. A null value should mean incomplete planning, not “count it by default.”

3. Allow planned collections to differ from the award ceiling

This distinction is important.

For a conventional fixed pledge:

sum of committed pledge allocations
≈ awarded amount

For a reimbursement award:

awarded amount
= maximum available award

sum of pledge allocations
= current forecast of collections

The forecast can be below the ceiling and can be revised as plans change.

For example:

Federal award ceiling:             $3,000,000
Current expected collections:      $2,550,000
Expected indirect goal credit:       $425,000

This means the system should not enforce a universal rule that pledge allocations must sum to awarded_amount.

Instead, expose derived values such as:

plannedCollectionAmount
plannedGoalCreditAmount
unplannedAwardCapacity

Where:

plannedCollectionAmount
= sum of active pledge allocations

plannedGoalCreditAmount
= sum of goal-counting pledge allocations

unplannedAwardCapacity
= awarded amount − planned collection amount

The last value is informational only. It is not a drawdown balance and should not create tasks or accounting workflow.

4. Expected-payment records are still useful, but only for fixed commitments

The existing expected_payment_date lives on pledge allocations, with allocations sharing a date intended to represent one logical payment.

I would still replace that with a real expected-payment table, but use it differently by disbursement model.

Fixed commitment

Create explicit installments:

September 1, 2026 — $100,000
January 1, 2027 — $100,000
April 1, 2027 — $100,000

These support:

Cash forecasting
Due-soon and overdue reminders
Matching incoming QB payments
Partial installment fulfillment
Cost reimbursement

Do not require individual expected-payment records.

The annual pledge allocations are the collection forecast. The CRM does not need to know the individual claims or anticipated reimbursement checks.

An optional expected-payment record could be created only when the fundraising team happens to know that a particular payment is imminent, but it should not be necessary for the model to work.

So the primary distinction becomes:

Model	Annual forecast source	Specific cash schedule
Fixed commitment	Pledge allocations	Expected-payment records
Cost reimbursement	Pledge allocations	Usually none
5. Separate fundraising projection from cash timing

The system should produce two related but distinct projections.

Fundraising progress and projection

Derived from pledge allocations:

Expected fundraising by fiscal year
Expected direct reimbursement share
Expected indirect reimbursement share
Amount counting toward fundraising goal

This is the principal forecast for reimbursable awards.

Cash timing forecast

Derived from:

Expected installments for fixed commitments
Annual allocation forecast for reimbursements
Actual payments received

For reimbursement awards without installment dates, the system can place the projected collections into the relevant fiscal year without pretending to know the month or exact receipt date.

6. Winning a pledge should require the collection plan

After a pledge is won, the workflow should be:

Fixed commitment
Record awarded_amount.
Set disbursement_model = fixed_commitment.
Complete pledge allocations by fiscal year, purpose, and restriction.
Enter expected installment dates and amounts.
System displays expected cash and goal contribution by year.
Cost reimbursement
Record the award ceiling in awarded_amount.
Set disbursement_model = cost_reimbursement.
Enter the amount expected to be collected in each fiscal year through pledge allocations.
Split each year between direct and indirect.
System derives annual collections and fundraising-goal credit.
No reimbursement-claim or drawdown records are required.

A reimbursable pledge should not be considered planning-complete until its annual allocations contain:

Fiscal year
Expected amount
Direct/indirect classification
Required entity, purpose, and restriction information
7. Actual payments should still be evidence-created

For both pledge models, users should not manually create gifts against pledges.

When QB money appears:

The system identifies or proposes the pledge.
It creates the gift/payment from the actual evidence amount and date.
It links the payment to the pledge.
It creates the counted payment relationship.
It copies applicable pledge allocations into editable gift allocations.
It recalculates actual received amounts and remaining forecasts.

The current reconciliation path already creates payments from evidence and can seed gift allocations from pledge allocations.

8. Improve the allocation inheritance algorithm

The current implementation proportionally copies all pledge allocations into each payment.

That may be too crude once pledge allocations represent a multiyear collection plan.

A better default is to allocate against the remaining planned allocations, in this order:

An explicitly selected expected installment, for fixed commitments.
The fiscal year associated with the payment or reviewer selection.
Remaining pledge allocations for that year.
Proportional distribution across those remaining allocations.

For a reimbursement payment, the system could initially suggest:

Apply this $200,000 payment against:
FY27 direct:   $160,000
FY27 indirect:  $40,000

based on the remaining FY27 plan.

The reviewer could accept or adjust it. Once created, those gift allocations become actual history and do not change when the pledge plan is later revised.

9. Preserve plan-versus-actual provenance

Add to gift_allocations:

sourcePledgeAllocationId: string | null;
varianceReason: string | null;

Then the system can show:

Planned FY27 indirect amount: $150,000
Actual payments allocated:    $135,000
Remaining planned:             $15,000

or:

Actual payment allocation differs from pledge plan
Reason: Funder approved use for FY28 instead of FY27

The source pointer records inheritance. The gift allocation remains independently editable and authoritative for actual received money.

10. Reimbursement completion

Because the CRM will not track eligible expenses or remaining draw capacity, a reimbursement award should not derive completion solely from:

payments received >= award ceiling

It needs a simple explicit closure fact:

awardClosedAt: date | null;
awardCloseReason:
  | "fully_collected"
  | "award_period_ended"
  | "unused_balance"
  | "terminated"
  | null;

When closed:

Remaining projected pledge allocations should be resolved, reduced, or removed through an explicit plan revision.
The award should leave the active collection forecast.
The system should preserve the original award ceiling and actual payments.

This is enough for fundraising reporting without tracking the underlying reimbursement administration.

Revised architecture
Pledge header
├── award ceiling
├── disbursement model
└── grant letter

Pledge allocations
├── expected collection amount
├── fiscal year
├── direct / indirect
├── purpose and restrictions
└── fundraising-goal treatment

Expected payments
└── fixed installments only

Actual gifts/payments
├── created from QB/Stripe evidence
├── linked to pledge
└── editable allocation snapshots from the pledge plan

The central rule should be:

For a reimbursable award, the header records the legal award ceiling, while pledge allocations record Wildflower’s current annual collection forecast and direct/indirect fundraising treatment.